I'm here to talk about the red side of the Vietnam War, as you can see from the text up there. But I want to start way before the Vietnam War. In 1759, a British general was about to assault the city of Quebec in Canada. This was during the Seven Years War, and he was going to be fighting the French on the Plains of Abraham beneath the city. With the city looming way up high in front of him, he turned to someone on the staff and he said, war is an option of difficulties. About 70 years later, Clausewitz wrote much the same thing. The difference is, it took Clausewitz 500 pages to say what Wolf said in one sentence. For Wolf, war truly was an option of difficulties. He died in the assault, but his words have lived on, and they're really worth taking to heart, especially in this case. Vietnam War is the only war in which the United States has not achieved its most basic political objective. Who should control the major piece of test, the territory at stake in the war. So the literature on the United States and Vietnam in this war is full of the difficulties, full of the problems the United States had strategically, operationally, politically in fighting this war. But it wasn't just on the American side. There were problems. And my lecture's about the problems on the other side. And my advice to you is, do not be a Naval gazer. Now, this is the Naval War College, but I'm talking about a different Naval than the Naval War College. I'm talking about your belly button. A former student of mine was a battalion commander in a very nasty neighborhood in eastern Afghanistan, right up on the Pakistan border. He's a very sharp guy, potential chief of Staff for the army someday, and had a very good command tour in a very bad neighborhood. And one reason he had a good command tour is because he figured out the other side's pattern of attack. Taking advantage of the very good ISR he had, he built up a folder, and he began to be able to predict when the bad guys were going to kind of cross the Pakistan border. He was kept on for 15 months in that tour, so had plenty of chance to act on his insight. The time for the handover to the next battalion commander came. Battalion commander arrives, and all he wants to know is about his logistics. How is he going to get stuff to his guys? In other words, all he wants to know about how he can solve the problems on his side of the war. Now, my student kept pointing this folder at him and says, hey, look, that's important. You got to get stuff to your guys and keep the morale up, but you're fighting somebody. It's all here in this folder. You need to get your nose in that folder and absorb it because it'll make a big difference in your tour. What he was saying to his successor is, don't be a navel gazer. Think about the other side and what they're doing. This is all about interaction. And as you're thinking about the other side, think about their problems. It's not just you that are problems. They have problems. You need to understand there are problems. And if you're going to be successful, you need to exploit those problems. Now, what I'm going to do today is look at the problems the North Vietnamese had. They had very serious problems. And I'm going to organize my analysis of those problems in terms of our last course themes. International dimension of strategy. I'm reframing the word slightly institutional dimension of strategy, the social dimension of strategy. And in doing that, I want to take advantage of a new pile of information we have. Since about the 1990s, we've had a lot of new information on the Chinese and the Soviets in the Cold War. But it's only really in the last five, maybe 10 years. We have new information that's made its way into the English language literature on the North Vietnamese side of the war. And I've been trying to keep up with that information, and I'm going to do my best to incorporate that in my lecture today. There is no startling revelation here, but I think over time, as this information gets absorbed into our understanding of the war, it'll pretty seriously change how we think about this war and the different ways it might have turned out. So let's take a crack at it. I want to give you a broad overview in terms of the three themes I just laid out of the big picture here. And then we'll sort of apply these dimensions as we go along through the war. I want to start with the international dimension, because this war is part of the larger Cold War. And North Vietnam had two allies, the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China. The Communist coalition in East Asia, including Southeast Asia, goes back, as you'll remember from Professor Adele's lecture, to 1949, 1950. That's when that coalition came together. And when the new information on this came out, I was really startled about how close those four players, China, Soviet Union, North Korea and the Viet Minh, how close they had come together in that period. That was really new information, especially in the case of Vietnam, the Chinese aid. Once Mao came to power In China, in 1949, the Chinese aid to the Viet Minh was absolutely critical in their ability to beat the French. They really turned the war around. After that, aid from China started flowing in. You've seen the importance of Soviet Chinese aid in the Korean War. There were, of course, in the Korean War some problems between the Soviets and Chinese, but basically the coalition held up fairly well. I mean, the Chinese resented the way Stalin manipulated them. It began to appear to the Chinese the Soviets were trying to fight to the last Chinese in this Korean War. But still the alliance emerged from that war intact. And even after Stalin died, the Sino Soviet alliance remains in pretty good shape. Stalin's eventual successor, Khrushchev, really bent over backwards to help the Chinese out, as we'll see. Mao didn't think so much of Khrushchev, but it wasn't Khrushchev's fault. I mean, apart from the fact he was sort of a boorish peasant and Mao didn't think much of that. Khrushchev really did try to make this alliance work. But some things happen. Well, before I get to the things that happen, one thing that's extremely relevant to the Vietnam War is, is what happened at the Geneva Conference in 1954. The Viet Minh thought they had achieved enough militarily to deserve to take over the whole of Vietnam. But at the conference, they only got half a loaf. The country was partitioned, split into two, what were called recruitment zones. And the idea was two years after the conference in 1956, there would be a reunification election. The Vietnamese Communists were, many of them were very suspicious this election would ever happen. And they turned out to be right, to be suspicious. But what happened in that conference that's important for the war we're studying this week is the Soviets and Chinese essentially ganged up on the North Vietnamese, the Viet Minh, and made them just accept half the loaf. In other words, just North Vietnam. The Vietnamese Communists gave way, not very happily, to this pressure, but the Soviets and Chinese cooperated to put this pressure on him. And this was a trauma, a trauma for the Vietnamese Communists. They never got over it. It's going to pop up again and again in the lecture, their fear of this happening to them again. It was after that conference, really, starting with Khrushchev's famous speech of 1956, that the split between the Soviets and Chinese begins to open up. Mao saw no reason why Khrushchev should have said what he did about Stalin. Actually, Mao was on his way to killing more Chinese than Stalin killed Russians. So you can see why maybe he was unhappy to have the dirty laundry aired. And the more that Mao dealt with Khrushchev, the less impressed he was. The split gets worse. By 1958, Mao starts a crisis over the Taiwan Strait, and he wants full backing from the Soviets. And he doesn't really get it. The Soviets are appalled because when they say to Mao, well, we have to worry about nuclear war, Mao says, so what? There are hundreds of millions of Chinese. If they wipe out 300 million of us, we'll stole plenty more. This was not very reassuring to Khrushchev. By the way, Khrushchev had told Mao, and was already doing this, that he would help the Chinese develop their own nuclear capability. Khrushchev began to have second thoughts about that, backed away from the help in the nuclear program, and in fact withdrew all the Soviet advisors and helpers in China. And they've been doing a lot for the Chinese economy by 1960. So this split is a big deal. And it gets worse over the period we're going to be talking about today. Now, on the one hand, you would think this was good for the North Vietnamese because the two are never going to gang up on us again like they did at that Geneva Conference in 1954. On the other hand, if you're a smaller communist power and your two big Communist brothers are fighting like hell with each other, you have to worry about how all that's going to play out in terms of their willingness and ability to aid you. So this makes the North Vietnamese nervous. They handled this situation pretty darn well. They were able to play the two communist superpowers off against each other and get them into a competition, in a sense, to give North Vietnam aid. And that was extremely important in the Vietnam War. But the North Vietnamese always remained a little bit leery that something bad might come out of the split for them. The split reaches its peak, in a sense, in 1969, when Mao actually picks a fight with the Soviets. I don't want to get into Mao's mindset here and why he would do that, but on the Sino Soviet border, an actual military conflict breaks out in 1969. I'll get back to that later, but at that point, and it's a very important point in the war for North Vietnam, that's really a sort of a thing that's really anxiety inducing for the leaders in Hanoi. It's about this time the United States finally begins to try to take advantage of the Sino Soviet split. American leaders, political leaders, and military leaders have been aware of this all through the 1960s, if you go down to President Johnson's Presidential library in Austin, Texas, and look through the papers, it comes up a lot in discussion. They were never really clever or creative enough to figure out how to take advantage of it. By 1969, there was a new team in place that was much more willing and able to try to take advantage of that split. So that's the overview for the international dimension. What about the institutional dimension in Hanoi? This is where there's a lot of new information. And a former colleague of Professor Adele's, the woman in the picture at the bottom, Nan Hong Nguyen, Vietnamese, American, now PhD from Yale, teaching at University of Kentucky, wrote a book on Hanoi's war that's extremely good on the internal institutional situation in North Vietnam. Got a lot of access, not only to documents, but people were willing to let her interview them. Big thing that you need to take on board. And one myth that needs to be exploded is about Ho Chi Minh and General Jopp. In the war against the French, Ho Chi Minh was the absolute key political leader, and Jopp was the key military leader. Not so in the war against the United States, Ho Chi Minh was not the key political leader. He was still sort of a figurehead in the outward face of the regime. It does appear he had been discredited by his willingness to accept the outcome at the Geneva Conference in 1954, that that had hurt his reputation among his colleagues in Hanoi. Giap could well have been Ho Chi Minh's successor, but got outmaneuvered in the late 1950s. And he is war minister during this war. But he is not the key player on the strategic side of the war. So just take those two guys and put them in the back of your minds. They are not the key figures. Who is the key figure. The key figure is that guy in the second picture down on the left, and his name is Le Xuan. Le Xuan. And his key political sidekick, it turns out, is Le Ducteau, who. Who was later the negotiator with Kissinger at the Paris peace talks. I didn't put the picture of the sort of security service head of the regime, but he plays a heavy role in what happens and is a very important supporting role in Professor Nguyen's opinion. North Vietnam became more and more of a police state during the Vietnam War. Now, Americans sometimes argue, well, were the Vietnamese North Vietnamese? Were they more communist or more nationalist? That's a silly debate. They were both. They were serious communists and they were serious nationalists. All of them wanted two things and put a high value in two Things one, yes, the reunification of the country under communist control, but two, under the building of, of socialism, the development of a socialist economy in North Vietnam. They put a very high value on that. Where the conflict arises is they put different weights on those two things. Different leaders in the regime put different weights on those two things. And this created a lot of institutional turmoil. Notice I used the German word for policy politics in the heading of that slide, politik. And this is really important here because the politics of policymaking in North Vietnam was extremely contentious, Extremely contentious. These guys did not agree on what to do. And the key story of the war is the war against the United States is Le Duan got his way at every turning point in that contentious process. He was very hard line against those who didn't put the same value that he did on the reunification struggle. Making the first effort in the South. Is it going to be south first or north first? You're going to worry more about building socialism in the north or more about conducting the war in the south lays on said war in the South. And anybody who disagreed with him, he was very hard on. In addition, there's this great myth, it was part of the whole propaganda campaign of the communist side, that the southern revolutionaries were autonomous. The new information has absolutely exploded that the so called Viet Cong, or whatever you want to call them in the south were under very tight control of Le Duan. What about the social dimension? Professor Yoshihara talked about some of the difficulties that the new state of South Vietnam had when it came into being in the mid-1950s. North Vietnam had difficulties too. One of the social science books I most like is from somebody who was very helpful to me in my career, a man who just died, an emigre from Germany, Albert Hirschmann, brilliant mind, wrote a book called Exit Voice and Loyalty. And why do I bring it up? It has nothing directly to do with the Vietnam War. I don't think Hirschman ever wrote a word about the Vietnam War. But it's relevant to the situation in the north when the war against the French ends. The heart of French rule in Vietnam had been in the North. And in the long period of French colonialism to Vietnam, a number of people converted to Roman Catholicism. There were a lot of Catholics in North Vietnam, a lot of very religious Catholics. A communist regime in principle is atheistic. In addition, a lot of those people who converted to Catholicism had done relatively well materially under the French. They were landowners and business owners and things like that. New communist regime comes in. It's not going to be a Very happy situation for those guys. What do they do? Should they leave? That would be the exit. Should they try to bring about change within the regime? That would be the voice. Should they just sort of shut their mouth and play along loyally? That would be loyalty. Well, what did they do? A lot of them got out, and some of this was stimulated by propaganda from Americans or people in the South. But there was this huge flow of refugees, Catholic refugees, from the north to the South. Now, probably in the long run, that helped the north because it took a potential large opposition group out of the political system. But in the short term, it means a lot of people are leaving the country. You know, a significant part of the population leaves the country. And, oh, by the way, the US Navy helped those people leave. But that wasn't the only problem. When communist government sets up shop for the first time in the days when the Stalin model was there, what are you going to do? You have gotten support in the war against the French, like Mao did in the Chinese civil war, by promising peasants land. You've done land reform. You've given them land. You've taken land from the landowners. But as a communist regime, especially working according to the Stalin model, you want to go to collectivized agriculture. So that land you've given to the peasants, you're going to take away and make them all part of a collective thing. North Vietnam started in that process, and it created all sorts of problems. The regime handed down execution quotas to the people carrying out the land reform. We want you to execute just a certain percentage of the population. You know, don't determine who's innocent or guilty. Just you got to come up with your quota number. Right. And some of the agents did this a little too enthusiastically. Well, there are uprisings out in the countryside, and there's a lot of repression. There's huge debate over how many people the regime killed in this process. Is it something like 10,000 or is it much higher figure? I have no idea. But a fair number of people died. This is a rocky way for a new communist regime to get started. It is a very rocky way. And there were problems in the cities where the urban intelligentsia hung out. You know, intellectuals like freedom of speech, freedom of thought, and they hoped to have it under the new regime. They didn't get it, so they're unhappy there as well. In addition, when the French were there, they hadn't done much to develop the country economically, at least in the sense that you would want as a new regime. Japanese, as colonists, were extremely hard on the People they colonized culturally and politically. But in many places they did at least set up an industrial base. There's no industrial base in the North. If you're a communist proceeding according to the Stalinist notion of how to build socialism, what you're trying to do is industrialize. The North Vietnamese regime has no industrial base to start from. They're essentially starting from scratch. So this is a very poor, underdeveloped country in industrial terms. And that's a problem, as we'll see. Okay, what about in the South? The south is a distinctive environment even within Vietnam. The Nguyen dynasty, the last dynasty in Vietnamese history, had sort of expanded South. The south was sort of like the frontier. It was almost like the Wild west in American history. And it was a very heterogeneous place. And it became even more heterogeneous when all these Catholics came down from the North. You had lots of Buddhists, you had a lot of Catholics. There was a history of inter village conflict between largely Buddhist, largely Catholic villages. As Professor Yoshihara pointed out, they were away from the Vietnamese to lived in the coastal strip in the Mekong Delta. Up in the highlands, there were different ethnic groups. This is a very hard place to establish a new government in. The French had trouble ruling the South, Diem had trouble ruling the South. And the Republic of Vietnam leaders who followed them had trouble. And I think when the north took over, they had troubles. This is a hard place to govern now. At first, it looks like Siam does fairly well. His first part is to deal with two religious sects and I don't want to get into the details, and one criminal enterprise. And in his first couple years in rule, he's sort of using a heavy dose of repression. He gets control over those dissident elements over time. Though he had a lot of problems with the development of a Buddhist opposition at the beginning. He makes a lot of effort to conciliate the Buddhist community and relations are okay for a while. At some point they go sour. I think one of the things that happened is his brother became Archbishop of Hu up in the northern coastal area in 1960, and that didn't help things. The Buddhists thought they were some sort of Catholic conspiracy to sort of marginalize him. Well, by 1963, all hell broke loose. And in fact, that Buddhist monk in a very famous episode set himself on fire in the middle of the street. And that sort of exploded into the international media. And you can imagine big crisis in 1963 that leads to the coup against American sponsored coup against Diem. But notice so far, in talking about the south and Diem's regime, I have said nothing about the Communist problem. His first priority wasn't actually turning against the communists, it was to deal with this other stuff. But by the late 50s, he's pushing hard on the communists and they begin to push back. And as we'll see, the north supports that pushback. By 1960, you had the announcement of the establishment of the National Liberation Front, where the Communists are the core, but it's meant to sort of attract non communists into the. The developing insurgency against the end. Now, the Communists have a very clear doctrine for how to wage insurgency. And the key concept is Dao Tran struggle. And they talk about actually three forms of struggle. I only put two up there. Political struggle, sort of in the villages, also in the cities, military struggle. And you're going to read about this in one of your readings, sort of. He'll take you through Douglas pike, take you through these two forms of struggle. There's also a diplomatic struggle, sort of a trifecta. Now, when you look at this as you read about this, you'll say, oh, I understand this. This is the Maoist model. Well, yes, to some degree it is. But the Vietnamese don't like to just ape something Chinese and just leave it at that. They want to put their own Vietnamese characteristics on it. And so it was with the Vietnamese Communists. Their mantra, and this is especially important for Le Zuan, the guy I was talking about, the leader who's really the guy who counts, is this should build. This whole movement should build toward not only a general offensive, like a Mao third phase offensive, but a general uprising. The Vietnamese Communists have a different attitude toward what's going to happen in the cities than the Chinese Communists do. Mao's going to build his power up in the countryside and then sort of surround the cities and take them over. In the Vietnamese version of all this, what's going to happen is you're developing the struggle in the countryside. Political struggle, military struggle. At the critical point, there's going to be uprising in the city. Now they're probably harking back to what happened in Vietnam at the end of the Second World War. In August 1945, there was sort of a general uprising that brought Ho Chi Minh into prominence. They're perhaps also harking back to the French revolutionary tradition of urban insurrection. But wherever it comes from, it's a very important part of their, of their doctrine for insurgency. And it's different than the Maoist doctrine. Another difference that you need to keep in mind is they had one sort of strategy for dealing with the South Vietnamese government, and it's more this sort of neo or quasi Maoist thing with the genuine uprising. Another strategy for dealing with the Americans. With the Americans, what they're trying to do is identify what is the American strategy at any given time, and then we're going to attack that strategy. So they, before 1965 and the heavy intervention, when we're there with advisors and other forms of support, they call that special war. So they wanted to defeat that special war strategy of the United States. When we intervene with hundreds of thousands of troops, they call that limited war. And they want to show the Americans that won't work. Later, as we start to withdraw and do what we called Vietnamization and accelerated the pacification, they identified that, and they say we want to defeat that strategy. So they're running sort of two sorts of strategies at once. Before we get into the details, I want to lay out some strategic concepts for you. What we're talking about here. On one side, the red side, they are unable to destroy. Certainly the United States means to fight on. They can do that with South Vietnam. They can't do it with the Americans on our side. We could have destroyed North Vietnamese capabilities to fight on, but we restrained ourselves from doing so for larger international political reasons. Right. So what do you do in these situations where neither side can destroy the other side's means to resist? You need some concepts for that, and there are a bunch of them, what social scientists now call denial strategies. And I think Colonel Hahn will be talking about this on Monday. And cost opposing strategies. You can find them in Clausewitz on page 91. So that's part of your repertoire in these sort of situations. In addition, we can take from Swansea two things. Attacking the enemy strategy and attacking the enemy's alliances. And finally, from my theory of victory framework, you can take the notion of attacking the enemy's political system. All these things are at play in what I'm about to go through. And you want to see who did better. Running through these different concepts and turning them to their advantage. And what we're going to do, since this is a lecture on the. The red side, we're going to focus especially in North Vietnam, and we're going to do so with four. I have five up there, but we're going to be doing the bottom four. There are five major reassessment points. These reassessments in North Vietnam drive the different phases of the war. You'll be studying. The first one in 1959, is when they make the decision. After Diem's been giving the Communists left in the South a very hard time, they decide to support the Southerners in fighting back. So they go to armed struggle. That decision is made in 1959. We won't be covering that. We will start with the one in late 1963. They see a chance to win a relatively quick, decisive victory over the next two years. What they're trying to do is win in the south before the United States can intervene. Then the next reassessment point comes in 1967. They've not been able to win that quick, decisive victory. They reassessed, and they unleashed the tet offensive in 1968. Next reassessment point comes. The Tet offensive doesn't work militarily in the sense they wanted or politically in the sense that they wanted against South Vietnam. They come to another reassessment point in 71, and that leads to the Easter offensive of 72, which then in turn leads to the peace settlement, finally in 1974, the last reassessment, when they decide to go on the final offensive, which brings them victory in 1975, about a year and a half earlier than I expected. Okay, well, let's start. What I'm going to do is, in each case, give you the context, drawing on these dimensions of strategy that are registered in our course themes and highlighting the problems they had in each of those dimensions. Let's start with 63. Remember, this is when they make the decision that they have a chance to win a quick, decisive victory in the south over the next couple years. What's going on in the international dimension? Well, the split between the Soviets and Chinese has gotten really, really bad. Their relations are a new low. And one thing that's disquieting for Le Duan is they're supporters of the Soviets in the North Vietnamese political leadership, and they're supporters of the Chinese. Le Duan himself leaned toward the Chinese. Why? Because Khrushchev had been talking for a while about peaceful coexistence, and it just turned Le Juan's stomach just like it did Mao's wisdom. There should be no place for peaceful coexistence in this war between the capitalists and the Communists, this great Cold War. So Leizuan was leaning toward the Chinese in the split. But the problem was there were a lot of people in his leadership group in the North Vietnamese political elite who were more leaning toward the Soviets. So there's a problem. This got tied up into the debate over whether to commit North Vietnamese forces They'd been sending forces south for several years, but now the question was, would you send whole North Vietnamese main force units, regiments down to the south in large numbers? A lot of debate about this. Because you do that, it's going to raise the cost of the war. It's going to raise the risks of American intervention if you can't get the war over with before the Americans have time to get in. The costs are relevant because you have people in the leadership group who are saying, no, we need to build socialism in the North. We've gotten off to sort of a ragged start. We didn't even get around to our first five year plan until 1961. This has not gone well. Why are we sending stuff to the south when we need to concentrate on building socialism in the North? But the trump card for Le Duan is look what's happening in the South. The coup against Diem. Diem ends up getting killed. There's chaos in Saigon, one government after another. This is our big opportunity. We can take advantage of that instability. Remember the doctrine of general uprising. The conditions are right for this sort of general uprising. So they make the decision. We are going to send main force units to the South. We're going to send a bunch of regiments, and our hope is that they're going to be able to win within two years. So a quasi quick, decisive victory. Where's the main effort going to be? It's going to be in the Central Highlands. They hadn't been terribly active in the Central highlands in the beginning of the insurgency, but they look at the situation and said, that's the Achilles heel of the South. So that's where our main effort's going to be. And what do they hope to do? What's their theory of victory? We're going to deliver a series of military blows to the South. They've started to be able to sort of inflict tactical defeats on arvn, the army of the Republic in Vietnam. And they envision even bigger blows and a bunch of them right in a row. And what they think that's going to do is as people in the cities see what's happening, there is going to be this general uprising that Le Juan is so committed to. And what would happen then? Well, you would undermine the South Vietnamese regime that the Americans are supporting. This is a way of attacking the Republican of Vietnam alliance with the United States. If you knock the local pillar out, the Americans won't have anybody to lean on. So they'll have no options about staying on. The key assumption here is they could do all this before the Americans could get in. And when they did knock down the Republic of Vietnam regime, they weren't immediately going to set up a communist regime. They were going to set up a coalition government. Why? They thought if they had a transitional period, it would make it less likely that the Americans would get involved. If they went straight from knocking down the South Vietnamese regime to establishing their own communist regime, that would raise the odds the Americans would try to quickly intervene. So they wanted to avoid that. Here you have a map of Vietnam. I just want to highlight to you what I mean by these Central Highlands. This map is split into four military districts, what we call I Corps, Military Region 1, Military Region 2. The biggest one, but not the most populated one by any means, is the Central Highlands, the coastal strip here, but that's the Central Highlands up there. Then Military Region 3 is the one with Saigon in it. Military Region 4 is the one with the Mekong Delta, the most heavily populated area of South Vietnam. So they're going to put their efforts in what I'm calling Military Region 2 there. How did it all turn out? Well, for a while, it looks like they're going to be able to pull off this business about getting it over before the Americans intervene. Because they look at the election campaign going on in the United States between Lyndon Johnson and Barry Goldwater. Barry Goldwater is sort of an ultra hawk on Vietnam. And Johnson sort of decides to run as a dove, or at least a moderate says, I'm not going to send American boys to Vietnam, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And the North Vietnamese listen to this and say, hey, this is going to work. You know, the Americans, obviously not that eager to intervene. Johnson's going to win, so we're cool here. This will work. Another thing they had going for them, there's not a huge element of surprise here, but there is some surprise. They were able to flow their troops into the south faster than we realized. We're trying to track this movement and we track it to some degree, but they're sending more sooner than we realize. So that's good news for them as well. Third piece of good news, when they get to the Central Highlands and start fighting these battles, they go pretty well. They're doing well militarily as part of this surge. There is one thing that I've always puzzled over. There were a bunch of attacks on American air bases, and one of the main ones was the one in that picture, Pleiku, up in the northern part of the Central Highlands. At a time when the National Security Advisor, McGeorge Bundy was in Vietnam. These attacks really sped up the process or made the United States much more willing to intervene sooner to respond to these attacks. I'm not sure this made sense in terms of the North Vietnamese strategic concept. These attacks trigger the beginning of Rolling Thunder. But Rolling Thunder, you know, was a little bit unexpected for the North Vietnamese. But if it was going to happen, if there was going to be bombing of the north, they expected a much heavier bombing much earlier. Rolling Thunder remembers this gradual escalation of the bombing starting in the southern part of North Vietnam, going up and then gathering, going up in intensity. And what the so called masterminds behind Rolling Thunder thought is the North Vietnamese would see this pattern, see things are going to get worse and decide to stop before it did get worse. North Vietnamese didn't see this pattern. Right. This is too clever by half. There is a terrific book on the interaction. It's too complicated and too detailed to use as a reading in this course, but by a scholar in Washington, Wallace Tees wrote a couple decades ago a book called When Governments Collide. Full of stuff about how fog and friction work here and how the interaction process works. The signals we thought we were sending in the north weren't being picked up. Okay. Once we decided to intervene, there was a surprise for Le Juan. He had underrated our logistical capabilities. We're able to get lots of guys there a lot sooner than he ever anticipated. It's really a remarkable thing that happened in 1965, flowing troops into the country, you know, sort of the miracle of Titville. Right? We're good at that stuff. And he got taken by surprise. And as a result is Westmoreland gets enough troops in the country in time to thwart this effort at a quick decisive victory by the North. This is an example of denial. The first big battle has become very famous. The battle in the Yaodrong Valley. You can see it's in the central highlands near that air base that I had the picture up in the last slide. First big battle. Both sides drew different conclusions from it. Westmoreland says, yeah, my notion of search and destroy is going to work. I can have guys at a base, put them in helicopters, figure out where the North Vietnamese main force units are. Take my guys there and wax them. North Vietnamese look at this battle and say, hey, we didn't do badly. We could stand up to the Americans. Now an academic type like me would sort of look at the situation in winter of 1965-66 and said both sides should have been reassessing Certain things weren't happening as they expected and they should have been given a second thought. No, neither side reassessed. But Swan says, yeah, I'm going to carry on with my basic concept. Here's the news. Le Duan did, too. I always thought the North Vietnamese pulled back a little in 66 and got a little more careful about committing main force units. Uh, lays on, says, let's go for it. Okay, The Americans arrived, didn't expect that, but let's carry on. We're doing okay. He's hoping to deny Westmoreland's strategy of limited war, search and destroy and all that, and impose costs to the Americans by inflicting casualties. Right. Okay, let's jump ahead to the next reassessment point. Set the context here. I think we first have to give a little thought to Westmoreland's theory of victory. Westmoreland said, look, I'm really engaged in a process of attrition. That's my key strategic concept. My tactical concept is search and destroy, but my strategic concept is really attrition. I'm going to kill more of the enemy than he can replace. The kill curve is going to go up, and it's going to cross over the replacement curve. And when they see that that's happening, they'll realize they can't win. That is denial, and they'll give up. In addition, they'll feel the cost, the human cost of this war and the cost of transporting all those guys and supplies to the South. So there's cost imposition in Westmoreland's mind as well. Rolling Thunder, same deal. A big part of Rolling Thunder airstrikes are interdiction strikes. In other words, try to keep the supplies and manpower from getting from the north to the South. If the north can't get their manpower and supplies to the south, they're going to say, hey, we can't win. Denial, in other words. Meanwhile, in addition, the bomb is going to go further north, and it's going to go beyond interdiction targets to economic targets. For example, the small industrial plants, the small number of plants in Northeastern. Eventually, they're going to be hit, too. They're going to feel the economic cost of this quite a bit. You know, you really have two wars going on here. Westmoreland's war in the south and the air war in the North. But in theory of victory terms, they are closely integrated. There is a coherent theory of victory here resting on this notion of denial and cost imposition. Now, I'm going to give you how I used to look at this, I used to say I stood on the stage many times years past and said, hey, it didn't work. We were not generating the effects on the North Vietnamese that we thought we were. They put such a high value in the object. Our assumption that eventually they would do the rational calculation, this wasn't worth it was unrealistic. Plus the fact you couldn't even get to the crossover point because if the North Vietnamese thought they were getting there, they would sort of back off from up close combat and try to keep their casualty level down. We were never going to be able to get them in the box Westmoreland hoped to get them into. When we looked at the North Vietnamese and thought that they would engage in rational calculation, they couldn't win. They were paying a lot of costs. The costs were exceeding the value of the object. I used to say, hey, that's mirror imaging. That's how we would have thought about, but that's not how they were looking at it. The value of the object was so high for them, they were so unified in their war effort that this isn't going to work. That's what I used to think. What do I think now? It's changing. But I want to establish the context to understand, help you understand why I have a somewhat different view now. International dimension. They are getting a lot of aid from the Soviets and Chinese. They are getting so much aid, in fact, that if you calculate, we don't know for sure the numbers for this, how much actual economic damage we did by the bombing and then calculate how much aid the Soviets and Chinese spent. The Soviets and Chinese gave 3, 4. I don't know what the number is. Some multiple times the number of the direct economic damage we were doing to the North. And they wouldn't have given so much aid unless we were bombing the North. The Soviets and Chinese were always more interested in giving the North Vietnamese aid to defend themselves than they were in giving the North Vietnamese aid to go on the offensive. So if we hadn't done the bombing, North Vietnamese would have gotten less aid. But anyway, they got a lot. Okay, so everything's good, right? Right. Oh, not Exactly. Because in 1966, the Cultural Revolution breaks out in China. Mao essentially starts a civil war against his own regime. I mean, this guy's going totally batty. By the mid-1960s, it's not hard for Mao to go batty, but he's really up there in the stratosphere of craziness. And the North Vietnamese look at this and say, what are these guys doing this can't be good for us. He'll be so wrapped up in his internal situation that over time maybe he won't age us so much. Plus the fact Mao sent at the peak, 170,000 Chinese military personnel to North Vietnam to do things like help them rebuild the, repair the railroads when they're bombed, help them man the their air defenses, help man their coastal defenses, things like that. A lot of engineer troops. 170,000 is a lot. Keep that in mind when you try to figure out, if we had done more in the north, whether the Chinese would have intervened like they did in Korea. But some of those 170,000 in the north were trying to spread the cultural Revolution in North Vietnam. A lot of propaganda, the Mao Red Book, all that jazz. North Vietnamese leadership was not very happy about this. These Chinese running around acting like idiots on their territory. Meanwhile, what do you have from the Soviets? Yeah, you're getting a lot of aid. And the surface to air missiles are really, really important. If you're going to get bombed by the Americans, it's nice to have Soviet surface to air missile sites and the technicians to help you operate them. That's the good news. The bad news is that the Soviets are nudging you. Hey, negotiate, negotiate, negotiate. Negotiate your way out of this war. That is very upsetting to Le Zhuan. Meanwhile, this rift between the Soviets and Chinese is getting wider and wider and wider. A little before this time, Mao started reminding the Soviets that the Russians had stolen a lot of territory from the Chinese. By the way, that'll happen again in the 21st century at some point. But at this point, it happens. Mao says, you know, you stole that stuff from us. We want it back. That does not help the relationship. What's going on in the institutional dimension? Well, Le Juan's strategy for winning the quick, decisive victory is not working. And within the leadership group, there's a lot of disgruntlement about this. He is under some pressure. General Jopp in particular. Le Juan and Jopp had been rivals. Jopp had wanted to be Ho Chi Minh's successor. Now it turned out that Leslie was. These guys didn't like each other. And Jobs says we should be doing a protracted war strategy. This business of going for a quick, decisive victory makes sense. It's too costly, it's too risky. And then there's a third group, and these are the guys who are mostly concerned about building socialism in the north and saying, look, our whole effort to build socialism is now being derailed not just by the guys and the stuff we're sending south, but the Americans are bombing the hell out of us. By 1967, Rolling Thunder had rolled up in intensity. The bombing is getting serious. And these guys who are worried about industrialization in the north are saying, this is preventing us from doing our thing in terms of building socialism. Some of those people, probably not in the very top leadership group, are sort of pushing, like the Soviets were, the idea of negotiations. Le Zuan gets so worried about this train of thought in the leadership group and especially about the guys who seem pro Soviet, that he says, I got to act. And in the summer of 1967, there is a big purge, which we'll get to in a second. What about in the society at large? They're feeling the effects of the war. They really are. We have diplomatic reporting, not just from Western diplomats who are in Hanoi, but Eastern European who had much better contacts with the North Vietnamese leadership. They're worried about the effect of all this in the population. When the bombing starts, what the North Vietnamese do is they evacuate the cities. They take people out of the cities, anybody who's not mission essential personnel, and get them out to the countryside. Well, that makes sense on one hand, but it does not make sense economically. You're dispersing production. Domestic production in North Vietnam's in big trouble. So what does Les Lan think? Well, at this point, you have to remember Lee's mantra about strategy and war. This course for you, those of you who are going to be combat commanders, one of the best things you can take away from this course is a better sense of one to be audacious, one to be prudent. In this situation I've just described to you, Le Zuan says time to be audacious. No time for prudence now. Why? There's a stalemate in the South. We're not making any progress. We got to do something to regain the initiative we once had. We can't live with a stalemate. We need to break it. He looks at the south, and in 1966, the whole Buddhist crisis reemerged, and it looked like South Vietnam might fall apart again. But the situation was patched over. And by 1967, the situation in the south, the political situation, looks like it's stabilizing. Chu has emerged as the main leader. Professor Yoshihara talked about him in the earlier lecture. He's been through an election. It wasn't a totally fair election, but wasn't as rigged as the one later in 1971 was. It looks like the situation, finally the political situation has stabilized in the south, and that's not so good from the North Vietnamese point of view. But Le Duan said, look, yeah, maybe things are getting better down there in terms of stability, but I still think there's the potential for one of these general uprisings that I always talk talk about. His key assumption was the Vietnamese Communist cadre in the countryside were very good at winning people over to their side, Whether through inducement or coercion or whatever it took, they were good at doing it. His assumption was Communist agents in the cities could be just about as successful. Turned out that was not so, but that was his assumption. I think he's in a state that often leads strategic leaders to take a big risk. And you see this with the Japanese and Yamamoto the last time I talked to you about the Pacific War. He is in a state of strategic anxiety because not only is the situation in the south stalemated, but he knows that there are going to be more American troops coming into the South. The American inflow is not leveled off yet, and he's anxious about whether the North Vietnamese can match that. Right. So he's strategic anxiety, but he's overconfident operationally. When you have that mix in a strategic leader, it often leads to extreme risk taking behavior. And so it did in this case. What behavior? The decision to go for the Tet offensive once again under the mantra of general offensive. That's the military part. General uprising. What you think is going to happen in the cities, Basic concept here. Surprise attacks on a big Vietnamese holiday, The Tet holiday. Right. What are you going to do? You're not going to operate out in the Central Highlands anymore. You're going to take your forces and the Southern Vietnamese Communist forces, not the North Vietnamese Army, Southern Vietnamese Communist forces. And you're going to attack the cities. And that map up there shows all the attacks. Look at all those red spots. And that includes Saigon. Notice the cluster of attacks around the Saigon and the Mekong Delta. You know, so far that had been the main effort for the North Vietnamese. Now you have the cluster of attacks by Southern Vietnamese Communist forces. And what do you think is going to happen? Well, you think when Communist forces show up in the cities, people are going to rise up. Right. What about the Americans, though? You want to divert them. You want to be like the matador with the cape and the bully. The bull is Westmoreland. You don't want him thinking about the cities. The Americans weren't totally surprised by this. They knew that something was coming. But the north was able to convince Westmoreland that their main effort was going to be way up in the northwest of South Vietnam at Khe Sanh, just below the dmz, far away from the bulk of these attacks on the cities. Get Westmoreland diverted and distracted up there and attack the cities. And it worked. That part of it worked pretty well. What are the objectives for liaison? It's a maximum objective. You want to bring down the South Vietnamese government. That is the best way to attack the alliance between the United States and South Vietnam. You got rid of the South Vietnamese government. The United States has no ally and country anymore. You know, you've won. Now, some people have argued there's a minimum objective. And that minimum objective is deliver enough of a shock to the Americans that they're willing to go and negotiate with you on terms favorable to you from the North Vietnamese perspective. I'm sure there are people in the regime have thought about the attacks that way. I don't think Le Duan did. He's gone for the max. That's just the way he is. Huge, huge opposition to Le Duan's concept here. And among the leaders of that opposition, none other than Job Americans thought that the Tet offensive was Jopp's baby. He was dead set against it. He was so against it once the decision was made to do it. He got out of town. He went to Hungary, Ho Chi Minh. Ho Chi Minh is old and sick. He goes to China. I mean, Jop goes to Hungary just to be out of town when this goes down. He doesn't think it's going to go well, and he wants to show that he's not associated with it. Ho Chi Minh's getting medical treatment in China, but I'm sure he was happy not to be around when all this went down because he didn't think this was a good idea either. What does Le Juan do when this opposition emerges? Well, he's not going to switch, sort of try to take out Jopp or certainly not Ho Chi Minh, but he does take out Jop's subordinates. At the second level, there is a huge purge in this regime in the late summer of 1967. It has to do with people favoring the Soviet side or the Chinese side and the Sino Soviet split. It has to do with this Tet offensive. We haven't figured out all the details yet of what's going on here, but there is a relationship between the decision to do the Tet Offensive over the opposition of other people in the leadership in this part. So this is hardball politics here. Okay, what about the execution, the plan is so difficult to put together that there's tweaking in the plan until quite late in the process, until just before the attacks start. The guidance that goes to the guys in the south who are going to execute the attack is very late. And in addition, there are little glitches. Remember, war is an option of difficulties. It turns out that the Tet holiday doesn't start on the same day in different areas of South Vietnam. So when you tell the commanders, launch on Tet. To some commanders, that means a day before than it does to the other commanders. So the beginning of these surprise attacks, very ragged. Plus the fact the Vietnamese Communists had never done anything like this before. Look at all the cities they were attacking. This is an extraordinarily complex, dispersed operation. The command and control just sort of breaks down. So really, in terms of operational execution, not very good. Now, in one place, Hu up on the coast, the northern coast of South Vietnam, they're able to hang on in that city for about a month. Very bitter urban fighting. Rest of the places, they get repulsed much earlier. So in a military sense, this is a disaster. A disaster just like I think Jopp had predicted. Right. What does Le Zuan do? Is he going to cut his losses? Okay, it didn't work. Let's no, he says, pile on. Two more waves of similar sort of urban attacks in the rest of 68 just increases the debacle. Militarily speaking, from the Communist point of view, they take huge casualties. Basically, the Vietnamese Communists in the south, not the North Vietnamese main force units, they're not involved in this, are wiped out. Now, a lot of people say, oh, Le Juan did that on purpose. He wanted to get rid of the Southern Vietnamese revolutionaries because they were a pain in the neck. They wanted too much autonomy. Remember what I said earlier? He had control over these guys. He wasn't trying to get them wiped out. He was trying to succeed. But they did go wiped out because they're decimated. What's this mean? Over the rest of 1968, they lose control of the countryside that they had developed up to this point. The guys who gave them that control, the Vietnamese Communists in the south, both the forces and the cadres, a lot of them are gone now. So this opens up the way for the TH regime, with American support to extend its control out in the countryside. Plus another big thing that's often overlooked. This was a tremendous shock to Thieu and the Republic of Vietnam regime. They finally got serious about this war. There's a huge South Vietnamese mobilization in 1968. And after their army gets huge, and we support the buildup of that army, so the South Vietnamese are finally getting truly invested in this war. So that's a bad thing from the North's point of view. However, there is good news here. The shock effect all this had in Washington. Westmoreland had been called back by Johnson in 1967, late 1967, to do a tour of the country, give a speech in Congress, sort of saying, you know, the lights at the end of the tunnel. And he sort of painted a very rosy picture. He didn't quite believe what he was saying, but that was what he was supposed to say. And so you say all that stuff, and then this happens. You have on the TV screen, evening news, you have pictures of Communists forces attacking the embassy, the presidential palace in Saigon. What a disaster. They told us the war was going one way, and it clearly is not going that way. Right. But the big thing that happened serendipitously, President Johnson had gotten tired of Secretary of Defense McNamara being a Secretary of Defense. McNamara had been one of the architects of the intervention, but he'd sort of cooled on it very quickly. And Johnson felt he really wasn't still on the team anymore, and he wasn't getting along so well with the military leaders. And that was exposed at Senate hearings in 1967. And so they sort of parted ways. Johnson looks around, says, who's going to replace McNamara? He lights on a person who worked for Truman back in the early Cold War and had become a great Washington insider, very suave guy. Clark Clifford makes him Secretary of Defense. Johnson thinks Clifford's a hawk. But Clifford has developed deep doubts about this war. And when he comes in, Tet offensive happens, and then he's faced with a troop request. Westmoreland says, I want over 200,000 more troops sent to South Vietnam. You already have 500,000 plus there. He wants 206,000 more. That sort of mulls over Clifford, right? Westmoreland and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Wheeler, get together to sort of make the pitch for this troop increase. But Wheeler has a different agenda than Westmoreland. Westmoreland wants to use these troops to invade Laos and get at the Ho Chi Minh Trail. But Wheeler's concerned about the American worldwide position, which has been drawn down in places like Europe and Korea to support the war in Vietnam. He wants to build up our strategic reserves so we're not so thin in the other major areas of the Cold War. Wheeler had risen in the ranks because he was considered a great staff guy, the consummate staff officer and knew how to deal with politicians. But he blows it here. In making his pitch for the troops, he paints a very alarming picture. Well, Clifford's already freaked out. He doesn't need to be alarmed anymore. That was a real miscalculation. The other problem is it comes time for Westmoreland to explain what he's going to do with the 200,000 troops. Basically what Clifford does is he asks him for what I would call a theory of victory. If I give you these troops, General, how are you going to win the war? Well, Westmoreland was very inarticulate. I mean, he could not, Clifford says he couldn't articulate any sensible theory of victory, to use my jargon. So he's very unimpressed with Westmoreland. Said now one of the things about Westmoreland, if you think of what I said earlier, his strategy actually was generating effects on North Vietnam that led Luison to roll the dice on this Tet offensive. But Westmoreland's problem is he had a very linear view of interaction. He said, okay, I'm gonna build up and I'm gonna go search and destroy and I'm gonna kill them and they're gonna get ground down until the point where they just say uncle. Well, that's too linear a view of how an interaction works in war. If they're feeling the pressure in getting ground down, they're going to reassess, possibly in a different way. They're going to say, we're going to try something radically different. Westmoreland didn't anticipate that at all. If all along he'd been saying to Washington, look, I've been putting pressure on these guys and I think sooner or later what that's going to do is cause them to lash out in a potentially self defeating way. Once they do, I can attack their strategy. They make a mistake, I exploit the mistake. He could have set up his political leadership for saying, hey, I have everything figured out here. But that was too dynamic or nonlinear way for Westmoreland to really understand. I mean, he's a very linear mind. Anyway, Clifford says we gotta de escalate. But how's he gonna get Johnson to do that? That's not easy. Johnson's shocked like the rest of them by what's happened, but he's still committed to the political objective of an independent, non communist South Vietnam. Preserving that, Clifford has to figure out how to bring them around. There was a group, an advisory group called the Wise Men, both civilians and military leaders who had been prominent in the earlier stages of the Cold War, who were now sort of the eminence gris of the Washington scene on foreign policy issues, including people like General Bradley Dean Acheson. Clifford is able to use that group to bring Johnson around. I mean, if the establishment's jumping ship on Vietnam, Johnson says, well, maybe I do have to de escalate. And he makes his famous speech on March 31st when he says he won't run again, but he's going to stop the bombing. Not all the bombing in the north, but he's only going to bomb the very southern part of North Vietnam. And he wants to get into peace talks with the North. Wow. Big change, huh? So it turns out Le Duan salvages something from the Tet offensive, which had been such a military debacle for him. But. But did Le Juan take full advantage of the opportunity that opened up for him? The situation in the United States is primed for what I call an internal power shift. There is going to be an election in 1968. Johnson's not going to run. His vice president. Hubert Humphrey's going to run. Hubert Humphrey is well to the left of Lyndon Johnson on foreign policy on a whole range of issues. Hubert Humphrey, although he was a loyal player in this administration, is a dove. North Vietnam's interest is in seeing Hubert Humphrey win this election. And the way to get it so that Hubert Humphrey is going to win this election is to make it seem like the peace talks in Paris are going somewhere. Hubert Humphrey has two problems. Johnson doesn't like him. Johnson still committed to the political objective. Johnson does nothing to help Hubert Humphrey get elected until five days before the election when he says, okay, I'll stop all the bombing in the North. The communists all along have been saying, until you stop all the bombing in the north, we're not going to really negotiate. Seriously, we'll get together with you in Paris. Nothing's going to happen, though. Finally, Johnson stops. That's too late, right? What North Vietnam needs to be doing is being much more conciliatory. Early on, they could have gotten Hubert Humphrey elected. And if they gotten Hubert Humphrey elected, 1969 is a much more pleasant year for them than it was under Richard Dixon, who did get elected. What I'm saying here is that Le Zuan did not understand how to attack the American political system. System. And the first rate strategists are the ones who know how to attack the enemy's political system. Remember, it's the enemy political system you have to compel to do your will. So that needs to be your ultimate strategic focus. And Leslan couldn't cope with that. Then what happens? 1969 is a very bad year for the Communists. All the new information we have saying they were really demoralized both in Hanoi and out in the field, but they escaped the worst. You have a new president, Richard Nixon. He had been Vice president under Eisenhower when Eisenhower had come to office in 1953, he had seen how Eisenhower ended the Korean War and his interpretation of that was threats were really important in that case. Nixon thought the nuclear threat of 1953 was what was important. Now he wasn't necessarily going to threaten to use nuclear weapons against the north, at least not very directly. But he did want to make the North Vietnamese nervous about what he might do. His main foreign policy advisor, of course was Henry Kissinger, the Harvard professor. And Kissinger, great quote from refuse to believe a little fourth rate power like North Vietnam doesn't have a breaking point. Kissinger, with Nixon's blessing, tasked a staff effort to come up with escalation options which came under two code names, duck hook and pruning knife. And in that third bullet there I put some of the things that were being considered. The idea here was to do things that would have a shift shock effect on the north, things they weren't expecting that would really hit them hard. Much more intensive bombing of Hanoi with much fewer restrictions on where you could bomb in Hanoi. Maybe hit the dike system that was the linchpin of the irrigation of the rice paddies in the Red River Delta. Go much closer up to the Chinese border in terms of hitting the railways that were carrying supplies from China to Hanoi. Mine Haiphong, mine Sihanoukville in Cambodia, where stuff had been coming in for the communist forces in South Vietnam, maybe even the amphibious operations in the north. Unleash the Marines. Some talk of somehow using, quote, a nuclear device may be against the Ho Chi Minh trail. So lots of really serious stuff being considered here while this was all under consideration. Nixon sends a letter to Ho Chi Minh. He didn't know Ho Chi Minh wasn't a real decision maker anymore. So he sends a letter to Ho Chi Minh saying if you guys don't negotiate seriously by November 1st, I'm going to do really bad things to you. So here's the threat. This is going back to Eisenhower in 1953. Really bad things to you. What happened from Nixon's point of view? He never carried through on the threat. Why not? I think mainly because there were huge demonstrations, anti war demonstrations in October that Basically got Nixon extremely nervous. He feared an imploding Clausewitzian triangle, that the relationship between the people and the government would sort of break down. And he didn't want to go there, so he backed off and didn't carry through on this re escalation. I think Le Duan was extremely lucky. I think we came very close to Nixon doing this. And given the state North Vietnam was in in 1969, I think it would have had an impact in North Vietnam, perhaps even leading to an internal power shift among the leadership group in Hanoi. Okay, moving on. 19. Oh, I'm running over time. The next thing we want to do, and I'll stop with this next reassessment point. The easter offensive of 1972. Decision was made to do that in 1971. What's the international context? Remember that military conflict between the Soviets and Chinese in 1969 that leads to a diplomatic revolution in the Cold War? Mao realizes he's gone too far. He better sidle up to the Americans to counter the Soviets. So what you have is the beginnings of a Chinese American rapprochement. Once you do that, you already had the Soviets interested in detente with the United States, and Nixon's interested in detente with the Soviets, not least because of the draining effect the Vietnam wars had on American power. But once the Soviets see the Americans, Chinese getting together, it gives them extra incentive to get close to the Americans. We are in the sweet spot of the diplomatic triangle. In a diplomatic triangle, where you want to be is you want to have better relationship with the other two legs of the triangle than they have with each other. We were there. That is the point of leverage. In a diplomatic triangle. We were there. The Chinese and Soviets are essentially competing for our favor. Nixon and Kissinger hoped to make use of this. What they wanted and what Le Zuan in Hanoi feared was that both the Chinese and the Soviets would press them to make peace. From Le Zwan's point of view, this will be 1954. All over that trauma of Geneva happening again, both pressing in to make peace. And indeed, to some extent, that happened. The Chinese prod. The Chinese who had been against the North Vietnamese going into the peace talks in 1968, by the way, they'd been Tet offensive. They got pissed off with the North Vietnamese at that point of view. But they were thinking, can't let them get too pissed off. We got to get back into touch with them. But they said to the North Vietnamese, no, no, you should be talking peace now. I know we said you shouldn't in 1960. But you, Joe Enlai, the main Mao diplomat, was telling the North Vietnamese that the Soviets were doing more than nudging. They were prodding them. But here's the key thing, though. They were both prodding the North Vietnamese to make peace. They both still gave large scale material aid. They did not cut back on the aid. Now, how's all this affect Le Duan? You might think it would nudge him toward negotiating more seriously. Uh, he says I better go for it now because I'm not sure what's going to happen down the road. I may be in danger of a sellout very soon. So I need to take the key blow now that will bring this war to an end. It made him more determined to do a military offensive, a next military offensive in 1972, not less willing. Other context. He's under a lot of pressure at home in the institutional dimension. After all, Tet really didn't work militarily. All the stuff he's been saying about what offenses would bring, they're not panning out. War weariness getting worse and worse among the North Vietnamese population. The one good thing, though, was with the stop of the bombing in 1968, there's a time for the economy to recover. And there's actually a growth surge in 1969 and 1970 in the North Vietnamese economy. The first time in a long time there had been any growth at all from a very low base and a base depressed by the war. But they're finally growing. South Vietnam. This is Thieu's high point. Professor Yoshihar talked about the land reform, talked about the Phoenix program, accelerated pacification. The regime has more control over the South Vietnamese countryside than it's ever had since this war started. I agree with Professor Yoshihara. It does not mean that they'd won hearts and minds that people in the countryside felt positively toward the regime. The regime has more control. The fact that Tew is not necessarily all that admired, you can see in his attitude toward the elections in 1971. He rigs the elections. He disqualifies all his opponents. If he had been confident of his position, he wouldn't have done that. But he did. So you say, you see, even though he has more control than ever, he's not feeling really secure about his position. Remember this formula? Strategic desperation. Operational overconfidence. You see why Le Duan's strategically anxious now. Desperate, really. But he's operationally overconfident. One reason South Vietnamese army, with American backing, had invaded Laos in 1971 and got waxed it gave Le Juan a lot of confidence that despite our efforts to build up the South Vietnamese Army, North Vietnam could still defeat that army. There is a long, protracted planning process for this Easter offensive. We don't have all the details, don't know whether there was a sort of opposition to it. There was for the Tet offensive. The final plan that emerges. You can see here three separate fronts, three main fronts. One up north, troops coming across the DMZ and in from Laos. First city to take would be Quang Tri City. They do take that. Next city would be Hue down the coast. Second thing, Central Highlands. Third thing, Military Region 2, sort of in the general direction of Saigon. No direct attack on Saigon this time. But once again, as always, Leysin was hoping for the general uprising. This is something new for both armies involved in this. This is a high intensity, conventional series of battles. And neither side really had done anything like this before. The North Vietnamese are using tanks on a large scale for the first time, and they have problems with that. South Vietnamese had never fought like this before either. Remember, we had shoved them aside earlier into pacification. When we did the conventional conflict. North Vietnamese, they rolled the dice on this. They committed three quarters of their combat divisions to the south for this offensive. I mean, if we'd been willing and able to do an amphibious operation in the north, they would have been in duck soup. The thing works pretty well for about a month and a half, maybe two months in certain places. But then they run out of momentum in the North. They had problems, and Colonel Hahn's going to talk about this Monday. They had tremendous problems with American air power. And one thing that happened in 72, that didn't happen in 75, is Thieu sent his best commander, best combat commander up north to Quang Tri to stop the most threatening of the Communist prongs. And he succeeded and eventually took back quang tri in 1975. Instead of sending forces north to defend there. When they're under threat, he pulls back and that leads to their collapse. La Zuan did not expect Nixon to respond as vigorously to this offensive. His assumption is Nixon was sort of constrained by domestic opposition. He wouldn't lash out like he did in the event he expected that the defeat discredit our program of our strategy of Vietnam and pacification. Well, the Vietnamization thing, he didn't discredit. There were no general uprisings, the sort he was always hoping for. And as he saw that things weren't going so well, he shifted back to a minimum objective. He realized he couldn't get rid of the South Vietnamese regime in 1972. So what he did, which was very important for the peace treaty that emerged, was there was a shift of goal to attacking the South Vietnamese and American pacification effort. Why is this important? In 1971, Kissinger basically said in the negotiations with the Communists that in a ceasefire he would allow North Vietnamese forces to remain in place. So they had pocketed that little chip and they realized that they could use the Easter offensive to do that. If you remember where those offensives were, they're all in the border areas, right? The populations here and on the coastal strip, they can get their forces back into those places. Places they hadn't been for a while. Then if there's a peace settlement, those forces will be there for what happens after the peace settlement. So that's exactly what they do. Once they had done that, Le Zuan's ready for the first time to make a major concession. All along he'd said, our price for a peace is you've got to get rid of the Q government. We got to set up a coalition government right away. In September 72, the Communists backed off from that. You don't have to get rid of Q. There doesn't have to be a coalition government right away. And that made possible the peace agreement of 73. I'm sorry, I've gone on too long. As you can tell, this is the first time I've done it. And I know you all want to go to lunch, but I want to give you at least a very brief opportunity to ask questions. If you have any. Anybody have any comments? Comments, questions? Does this change anybody's view of what happened? Wanted to give you some things to think about. I didn't mean to give you 15 minutes. Too much stuff to think about. Okay, thank you very much.