Welcome back to the second half of Strategy and war course. It's good to see you all here this morning. This lecture today is on air power in World War II. So you may be like, why in the world we start with a film clip on the Red Baron? Well, first off, I love that movie and it's exciting to try to wake you guys up. But second, you can't really understand air power in World War II unless you go back to the origins of air power in World War I. Now in the if you remember, way back in the American Revolutionary case, we introduced Duhe, who argues that wars can be won at sea. And in the Russo Japanese War, we bring in Corbett, who agrees with Clausewitz that wars are won on land. And this week we introduce Duhei, who argues that wars can be won by. And so that's one of the purposes of today's lecture is to look at these air power theorists. The other purpose is to ask a number of questions. This idea of technologies, the introduction of new technologies. In this case it's introduction of the airplane. But also later we'll see the introduction of nuclear weapons, introductory of space, of cyber. It introduces fundamental questions. Are these new instruments, are they better thought of as substitutes or complements to military force? Do these new instruments somehow simply change the characteristics of warfare? Or more fundamentally, do they change the very nature of war? Now, I'm actually going to give two lectures today. The first lecture is going to be on the evolution of air power in World War I and how this informs the thinking on air power strategists. You'll know that lecture is coming to the end because I have another film clip at the end of that film clip. This is different than most lectures. I'm going to take a short Q and A based on that first lecture. The reason I do that is that the lecture is relatively long. Typically what I find is people only ask questions on the last part of the lecture. So I'll take a small Q and A at that point and then the second lecture. The second half of the lecture is going to be on the actual employment of air power in World War II. A couple caveats. It's just an hour. I can't cover everything. I would love to spend a lot of time talking about close air support and 9th Air Force, but I don't have time to do that. I love to talk about carrier aviation. I don't have time to do that. I'm going to specifically talk about independent uses of air power and specifically strategic bombing and the battle for air superiority. Now Clausewitz says that theory allows one not to start afresh each time. Now, Clausewitz died well before the advent of the airplane, but he actually got to see military aircraft in action at the Battle of Mainz, the siege of Mainz, in 1795. He was 15 years old, but he was presence on the battlefield when the French used tethered balloons for observation and adjust artillery fire. Now, Clausewitz does not write specifically about air power and on war, but there is an interesting section in book five, chapter 18. It's only a couple of pages. We don't assign it to you. You can take a look at it later. But he talks about the value of the high ground. He says there's three advantages. First, there's tactical strength. This idea if you're hurling projectiles, it's better to hurl projectiles with gravity than as opposed to gravity. The second is the high ground can give you a better defensive position. And tied with that is a third advantage, which is it can give you a better view. This idea from above, you can see the enemy's position better. But Clausewitz also gives us a warning. And that advantage of the high ground is just a potential. It only matters how you use it. And for Clausewitz, the way you use it is through victory in battle. For Clausewitz and I'll use in the course, we use the triangle, I'll call it the Clausewitzian Triangle. We see that the center of gravity for Clausewitz is attacking the enemy's military forces. Now, the theory of victory and all a theory of victory is, is the causal link between means and ends. For Clausewitz and on war, he provides three different causal links to achieving your political outcomes. The first is this idea of ideal or absolute war, the use of brute force strength to force your opponent to seize the objective. And this is actually a good way of thinking about World War II in Europe, when your aims are unconditional, unconditional surrender, it's not surprising that we see war tend towards that. I'll talk about a little bit more about that at the end of the lecture. But Clausewitz also says, in practice, when I hear in practice, I'm thinking of more limited wars, you may actually see two other means for seeking peace. This is the basis of modern coercion theory, this idea that instead of simply seizing what you want, you can actually compel your opponent in one of two ways. The first is the improbability of victory. This is the idea in Sun Tzuan terms, we would call it attacking the enemy's strategy. If we can convince the opponent that they have no hope of victory. If we can deny them the hope of victory, then they're likely to concede to our demands. In modern parlance, that's called a denial strategy. You attack the enemy's military capability to deny them their strategy. The alternative is to impose cost on the enemy. This is called a punishment strategy. If your expected costs exceed the expected benefits of war, then you should sue for peace. These are the three different causal mechanisms that Clausewitz provides us for understanding how the use of military force can lead to political outcomes. Now let's turn to World War I. It really isn't surprising that the military began to think about the airplane in terms of how it can help the battlefield. In part because of what airplanes look like. Here in 1914 is a typical military aircraft. It's a French Farman's. Now if you look at it, it's simply an ultralight. It's slow, it's vulnerable. That sphere behind the aircrew is a fuel tank. And the only real advantage that this aircraft has over tethered balloons is it has the ability to overfly the enemy's position. So soon what we'll find is that these aircraft will begin to carry wireless radio in order to be able to talk to ground forces. And the other thing that they'll carry is cameras and that will be used for observation. Here's an example of photograph taken over the German trenches. You can see the obvious advantage if you're planning an offensive against the German line, if you know where their trenches are laid. In addition, if you see those pox marks on there, that's from long range artillery and aircraft can be used to adjust artillery fire. Remember back to the Russo Japanese War. The amount of suffering that the Japanese are willing to endure in order to take 203 meter hill in order to be able to observe and adjust artillery fire onto the Russian navy. Now so this advantage of having command of the air is significant. And so what we start to see is aircraft. The pilots begin to take pistols and rifles. Soon they're taking lobbing grenades out of the side and then they're actually loading bombs onto aircraft. This is a British DH4 with a bomb being loaded on. Now the value of having command of the air is understood by both sides. And soon there's a competition to be able to gain it for your side and deny it to your opponent. Custom built pursuit aircraft are developed. We see technological, technological advances in terms of air to air weaponry, in terms of airframe design and importantly in terms of aircraft engine performance. Here's A German triplane here to show how quickly these aircraft can specialize. Now this battle in World War I in the air is attritional, just like the battle on the ground. I put this chart up here to show you. It not only shows you for the major powers the number of aircraft that are at the beginning and at the end of the war, but it also gives you some of the production capability. Now notice how many aircraft are produced and how few aircraft are available in 1918. This gives you some insight into how dangerous this new domain is. Now, most of these aircraft are not lost in combat. They're lost in accidents, through mechanical failure, through pilot error, through a number of different type of accidents. In addition to using air power to support the ground battle, though, we start to see some of the military services begin to think how air power can be used independently. And interestingly enough, it's going to be the German Navy that has the capability. They've invested in these Zeppelin rigid dirigibles. These aircraft are going to have the range and the bomb load in order to be able to directly threaten England. What we see is over 50 some raids during World War I by these aircraft. Most of these take place between 1915 and 1916. By that time the British are able to develop an early warning system and they're able to increase the performance on their fighters in order to be able to inflict serious losses on the Zeppelin, such that the German Navy goes to sporadic nighttime raids. What we see towards the end of World War I, the develop of long range bombers. Here's an example of the German Gotha 7. But really the war ends before either side is able to make significantly mature their offensive strike capability. What we do see however, is though the Germans are not able to destroy a lot of the English English infrastructure or inflict a lot of casualties, there is a significant impact upon the British population psyche. No longer is the Royal Navy able to defend the English population against direct attack and war. And so what we see in 1 April 1918 is a formation of the first independent air force, which is the Rafael. The RAF has two primary purposes. First, homeland defense, and second, to conduct retaliatory raids upon the Germans. The war is going to end before they're actually able to do airstrikes any further east than Western Germany. Now at the end of the war, the nature of the war of World War I significantly impacts nations afterwards. The protracted nature of it, the level of suffering, the attrition involved. And so what we see are nations trying to avoid a similar type of war. What we see is we see governments, we see civilians, diplomats try to develop different infrastructure institutions to avoid such a war, such as the League of Nations. And we see military theorists begin to think of ways to avoid another attritional war. Now, I put up this image, satellite image of Europe to discuss how geography plays into strategic thinking. We have France, Germany and Russia, the continental powers. Their existential threat is through invasion. So it's not surprising that the army plays an incredibly important role in the survival of the state. It should also not be a surprise that the thinkers on air power should look to see how air power can support ground forces. And so in Germany, we see combined arms approach, and the west would be known as blitzkrieg. And across the vast terrain of Russia, we see a similar concept known as deep battle. Meanwhile, the island states of England and Italy, and off the chart, you have the United States, you have a different problem, you have moats that protect you. And so what we see there are, we start to see strategists who begin to think about how air power can be used independently to project power across the sea. Now, the first of these thinkers, and we've assigned this to you, is Julio Duhei. We assign you key passion portions of his 1922 treatise, Command of the air. Now, Duhay correctly predicted that the next war would also be total. And he argued that because of the mobilization required by a nation state, there was really no difference between combatants and non combatants. Now, Duhe had the advantage in that he was riding in fascist Italy with Mussolini at its head. And so he could write passages such as this, that you could use air power, along with such weapons as chemical weapons, to directly attack the enemy's population. It would cause a breakdown of society, and this would lead to an uprising. Duhay argued that in order to do this, you needed to have an independent air force. An air force, in being very much a Mahanian concept of this fleet, in being at the outset of the war, that would gain command of the air. Now, Duhay argued, because of the vastness of space, you couldn't really engage effectively in the air. So you had to hit your opponent's air force is on the ground, the eggs and the nests. And once you gain command of the air, you can then prosecute the war against the enemy population. If we look at Clausewitz's triangle, we see for Duhe, the center of gravity is now upon the population and the suffering imposed. A punishment strategy, imposing suffering would cause the population to rise up against the government, sue for peace. Now, in Britain, we have Sir Hugh Trenchard. He commands British Air Forces in Europe, in World War I, the independent forces. He would go on to be the Chief of staff of the RAF until 1930. He's the father of the RAF. And after World War I, the post war lessons learned for the RAF is that while the bombing of Western Germany did not inflict a lot of physical damage or casualties, what it did do was it significantly impacted the morale, particularly of the German worker, into absenting the factories. His argument now he's writing and serving in a liberal post World War England where he can't write the same way that Duhay is. And so he says terrorizing munition workers is okay because they're, well, they're producing munitions. If you terrorize the factories, what that'll do is they'll be absent and that will lower the production of your enemy. What he's arguing for is a denial strategy here, that if you attack through area, bombing a large area, you'll have an oversized impact upon your opponent's production. Now, Trenchard has a different problem than Duhay does. Trenchard already has an independent air force, and in the interwar period, his problem is how do you keep that when the army and the Navy are trying to reabsorb aircraft. And so he does that in two ways. First, he makes this argument, the substitution argument. He argues that air power is more efficient than British ground forces in policing the Empire, and he's partially successful in doing that. And the other argument he makes is the fact that air power, strategic bombing will have a deterrent effect in war because air force offensive air power cannot be defeated, defended against, and the terror that it will impose will make it such that the cost of war will be too great. Now, these arguments by Duhay and by Trenchard are not lost upon the population or upon diplomats. Famously, this is Stanley Baldwin in 1932. He'd go on to be Prime Minister in Parliament. He famously argues that the bomber will always get through. Notice, he doesn't argue that the bomber will always get back, but. But it will always get through. But the second part of that sentence is equally important in terms of the theory of victory that Baldwin is discussing here. If you can impose cost heavier on non combatants, then this might be the way either to win a war or to avoid a war. Now we get additional evidence in terms of the potential impact of strategic bombing during the Spanish Civil War. Here's an image taken from a German bomber from the Condor Legion on the bombing of Barcelona. More famous is Picasso's painting representing the attack on the small northern Spanish town of Guernica, which still a tapestry hangs outside the UN Security Council. I actually saw it on the news last night in the background. This argument in terms of the terror that airstrikes can have upon the civilian population and likewise with Neville Chamberlain. Neville Chamberlain said that air power was an inherently deterrent weapon. He argued in 1936. He was Chancellor of the Exchequer from 31 to 37 before he becomes Prime Minister. And he suggested air power can be a significant deterrent to war. He pours resources into the RAF to develop their strategic offensive capabilities as well as later to develop their own defenses. And this idea affects his thinking at Munich in terms of appeasing Hitler. This idea of what the cost of war are likely to be when the Luftwaffe is threatening London. Now if we turn back to the United States, the most important theorist is going to be Brigadier General Billy Mitchell. Now Mitchell commands the US Air Expeditionary Forces in Europe in World War I. He's heavily influenced by Trenchard. He comes back to America with this idea that the United States needs an independent air force. But Mitchell has a different problem. He returns to an isolationist United States that has absolutely no interest in offensive strategic bombing capability. So for Mitchell, he takes on a new enemy, the U.S. navy. Mitchell argues that surface fleet is obsolete, that land based air can better defend the coast. And infamously, Mitchell and his lieutenants attack a helpless battleship anchored off the Virginia Capes. The German battleship Osfreeland, which is a war booty for the US is attacked and sunk in 1921. But Mitchell doesn't call off the attack afterwards. An example of overreach, at least professional overreach. Mitchell continues to attack the army and the Navy leadership, which ultimately leads to his court martial in 1925. Now Mitchell really doesn't have a theory of victory with strategic bombing. He believes air power is a Swiss army knife. It can do everything. Here's an example I took from one of his Bombardment texts in 1923. If you notice, air power is used to attack anything from military forces to tunnels to grain and water supplies. It's actually going to be left up to his lieutenants at the Air Corps Tactical School to develop a uniquely American theory of victory with strategic bombing. In 1931, when the air Corps Tactical School has moved from Langley, Virginia down to Maxwell Air Force Base, what we see is a core group of what becomes known as the bomber Mafia that are on the faculty and they articulate an operational concept that becomes known as high altitude daylight precision bombing. Like Duhay and Trenchard and Mitchell, they believe in the necessity of having an independent air force in being. They also believe in the offensive capability of an air force. They believe that a group of bombers can self defend and can penetrate enemy air defenses. But here's where they disagree with Duhay and with Trenchard. Their argument is that air power can be most effective if it targets your enemy's nation's economy, its industrial base, by attacking vital and vulnerable nodes to the economic network. Here's a quote from one of the lectures that the breakdown in the industrial machine by attacking the vital links, thinking of that as a chain of production is the most useful use of air power. Now unfortunately, Clausewitz's triangle, this theory of victory doesn't fit in that easily with Clausewitz's triangle. As a matter of fact, Michael Handel in his Masters of War suggests that because Clausewitz wrote pre industrial revolution that he misses a potential dimension of the nation. And that is the economic or the material dimension of a nation. And so Handel talks about squaring Clausewitz's triangle to include this material dimension, this technology dimension. Now if I take that square and I twist it into three dimensions and I create a three sided pyramid. The technical term is an equilateral tetrahedron. Can you see the government at the very top, at the apex of this three sided pyramid? If I use that, I could talk about the theory of victory. For the Air Corps Tactical School, it's both a punishment and a denial strategy. In terms of denial, what the Air Corps Tactical School says if you hit key industries, you can stop the wartime production of an enemy nation and you can deny that nation the arms for their military. That's a denial strategy. Simultaneously, while you're attacking or paralyzing the enemy economy, what you can do is you can incur suffering upon the population as well. That's a punishment strategy. And the combination of those two will ultimately lead to you achieving your political outcomes. Now, it's all good in theory. How do you do it in practice? Well, it takes two technologies that are developed in the 1930s to actually give the Air Corps, which would go on to be the US Army Air Forces, I'm going to just refer to them the Air Forces, to give them this capability for high altitude daylight precision bombing. The first technology on the right there is the development of the Norden bombsight. Norden bomb site is actually developed by the US Navy for the problem of how is it that you hit moving ships. But that same targeting process also works at high altitude for hitting fixed targets. And so you see as the Air Corps take the Norton bomb site and they put that into a new revolutionary aircraft. And that is the first four engine bomber, the B17. The B17 is significantly higher in terms of altitude, so it can overfly enemy flak positions. It got greater range, greater speed, and it can defend itself. You can see those machine guns bristling out of the B17. This is a significant leap in terms of technology. And the combination of these two are going to give the Air Corps a capability to perform high altitude, daylight, precision bombing. Now it's going to be up to that core group from the Air Corps Tactical School are going to be tasked to produce the air plan for the US to defeat both Germany and Japan. And here's an image, a map that was actually presented to FDR when he approved this plan. And the idea would be that by using England as a primary axis as well as an axis coming out the Mediterranean, that US forces could attack 154 targets that would end up paralyzing the German economy. Now, you can't really read it there, but the top three targets are electrical power, transportation and synthetic fuel production. And interestingly enough, after the war, what we find is that the US Strategic Bombing Survey suggests that those three were actually the three most vital targets to hit in Germany. Now what I'm going to do is I'm going to stop now and I'm going to show a 2 1/2 minute film clip from a major motion picture that was released in July of 1943 by Walt Disney. The name of the film is Victory Through Air Power. The title is taken from a book written by Alexander Seversky. If you listen at the very end of this clip, you'll hear an accented voice. That's actually Seversky's voice. And the reason I show this is it should cement in your mind this idea that air power can overfly the battlefield and directly attack the material capability of Germany. So Dean or Steve, can you roll tape? As long as we cling to a strategy based on surface warfare, the advantage is on the side of the enemy. Hitler's strategic position resembles a wheel. The hub is powerful industrial center which grinds out the implements of the spokes is supply lines that support the fighting front. The rim of the wheel, our surface strategy seeks to crush this structure by striking at the rim from all sides, millions of men and machines in a clash of steel against steel. Should we concentrate enough force to attack at any one point, Hitler can quickly shift his power and reinforce the threatened sector. No matter where we strike, Hitler can strike back swiftly with the right force at the right place. Should we strike from all sides with superior force, Hitler will contract his wheel, the spokes become shorter, the rim thicker, the whole structure stronger and more nearly impregnable. To successfully attack, we must use a superior force and attempt to knock out Hitler's equipment faster than he can repair place it. Tanks destroy tanks. And our supporting short range aviation plays an important part by destroying more of Hippa's equipment. But with his factories unmolested, he can quickly fill the gaps by moving his supplies short distances over dry land. By contrast, our replacements must be carried in transports over those thousands of perilous floating miles constantly under attack from the enemy. As long as we fight on the surface of the earth, Hitler has all the advantage. But with a strategy of air power, the advantage is ours. Air power ignores the battlefront of the R. By direct and independent action it strikes at the hub. With this all important source of enemy power knocked out, the whole structure will collapse and our surface forces will move in and clinch the victory with a tremendous saving in human lives. That's Seversky there. So this film was actually showed to Churchill and to Roosevelt in July of 1943. They watched it together. I'm going to now take questions on this first lecture on strategic bombing in World War I. Now, what questions did you have on this theory? We haven't got to the actual employment of how it actually does in practice. But we've been focusing on the development of the theory. Any questions? Sir. Good morning, Major. Strata seminar, Sir. You mentioned three theories of victory. That targets the military, the population, the economy, ministers target the government. Isn't the government ultimately responsible for the state? And is there a theory that supports targeting the government? Okay, excellent question. You notice the theories of victory, they were all on the basis of that three sided triangle either targeting the military or targeting the population of the material. Notice none of those theories target directly the government itself. Isn't that the rational decision maker? Why don't you just directly target the government? Well, it's actually, it'll take until the first Gulf War before we see an air power theorist that actually makes that argument. We'll see that in a few weeks time you'll read about Colonel John Warden who argues that the actual center of gravity for the type of nations that the US currently fights, autocratic regimes that don't necessarily have a lot of economic production. That it's actually a leadership attacking the leadership and that command and control will ultimately lead to the paralysis that will bring about the Outcomes that we're looking for. So that's a really good question. Just it hasn't been developed at this time. Other questions. Question in the back. All right, Sir Dan Thomas, Seminar 6. While do Haynes ideas and has influence how air power was deployed In World War II, the bombing of civilians did not need to relevant. Okay. All right, good question the relevance of Duhay. Now, it is true that the bombing of civilians did not lead to to the rise up against Hitler's Nazi regime or the British rising up against Churchill's regimes or even in Japan. What is kind of interesting is that I think Duheig has a better understanding of his own Italy. What we see in July of 1943 when US aircraft first bomb Rome, the marshaling yards outside of Rome, Mussolini's actually taken out of power. What it takes is the Germans to come in to set him back up in power. I'm not arguing the fact that Duhay's theory is going to work in every state, but it is the British, the German and the Japanese states are pretty difficult regimes to have population to do an uprising. I think what's more important and relevant to Duhei though is something that Duhe misses in the text. You won't get this in the actual text, but this idea is if I can't defend against you and you can't defend against me, but we both have this ability to terrorize each other, doesn't this increase significantly the cost associated with war? This is the fundamental elements of deterrence. And once you can put nuclear weapons onto aircraft or intercontinental ballistic missiles and you have mutually assured destruction, isn't Duhe much more relevant? That's what Bernard Brody will argue during the Cold War. And the other aspect here, if you think about Duhe's theory of victory targeting population, you can also think in today's wars on terror, is this not the theory of victory that terrorist groups are attempting to use? So I think there is relevance in understanding the core tenets of Duhe, even if he really didn't understand how air power could be used in World War II against a significant nation such as those that were faced. Good questions. All right, I'm going to go ahead and proceed with the second half of the lecture, which has to do with the actual employment of air power in World War II. Let's go back just a little bit to May of 1940, the collapse of France as the Luftwaffe begins to threaten Britain. I'm not going to talk about the strategic implications of the Battle of Britain. What I want to do is talk about some of the lessons that were learned or were not learned based upon this battle. Now, and particularly I want to talk about the terms of the offensive nature of air power and whether or not the bombing of civilians can be decisive. So the Battle of Britain takes place in a small piece of geography and over a really small period of time. It takes place over the Channel and over southeast England. Now, this map here, if you look in England, you'll see along the coast, black squares, the small black squares, those represent the early warning radar. And if you see the diamonds, the black diamonds and just the outline diamonds in southeast England, those are the Fighter Command's bases. And then in France, along the coast, those little triangles, that's the Luftwaffe fighter bases. And so what you're going to do is you're going to find the Battle of Britain, which is a battle for air superiority over the Channel and over southeast England, is waged over a three week period from the middle of August until early September. Ultimately, it's the ability of the British to use their early warning, their command and control. They're able to concentrate sufficiently their fighters to be able to engage the Luftwaffe, to prevent the Luftwaffe from gaining air superiority. Ultimately, it's going to be the Germans that blink when they divert their forces to the Blitz, the bombing of London and other cities. Now, there's a couple lessons that should be taken away from this. The first, both the Germans and the British learn you can't bomb unescorted during the day against an enemy that has an integrated air defense system and can concentrate significant numbers of enemy fighters. And so what we see is both the Germans going to nighttime raids as well as the British, which have already gone over to nighttime raids. The Americans who are observing though, remember they've committed to high altitude, daylight precision bombing. They've developed the B17 to defend itself. And so they are not convinced that the weak German medium bombers that are defeated, that the US Air Force is going to suffer a similar fate. The other part of this is that the bombing of British civilians does not lead to an uprising. And yet British RAF Bomber Command continues to plot to bomb German cities. The British believe the evidence from World War I is that the German military was stabbed in the back and it's the weakness of the German civilians that they will crack. Whereas, of course, the British, the English people, aren't going to crack under such pressure. We also see from Germany the fact that Hitler doubles down, he increases significantly his resources, his technology, and the development of V1 and V2 missiles in order to have a really higher retaliatory effect upon the British. Now, Bomber Command actually doesn't have much of a role to play in the Battle of the Britain. The best I could come up with in terms of its impact on the battle is when German bombs inadvertently hit East London. Churchill orders Bomber Command to bomb Berlin and Hitler responds by strikes on London that trigger the Blitz. The RAF and Bomber Command, they're torn between how they're going to use their bombers. Are they going to use them to bomb military targets or are they going to use them to bomb the morale of the German industrial cities? Well, by the summer of 1941, the conclusion is they can't do either. The Butz Report that's released in August of 41 says that the RAF bombers cannot find their targets. Only one in three get within five miles of their intended target. You can't even bomb a city if you can't get within five miles of the target. Now, to the British credit, they invest heavily in terms of technology, in terms of development of tactics. And so within a year to year and a half, what they've developed is electronic navigation, they've developed air to ground radar, they developed the Pathfinder, master navigators and Mosquito bombers whose primary task is to identify and mark targets for the stream of bombers that are coming forward. So ultimately Bomber Command is able to figure out at least how to bomb cities. In February of 42, Sir Arthur Bomber, or Butcher Harris, takes over Bomber Command and he conclusively determines that bomber's command role is to bomb cities, bomb the industrial capabilities of Germany. About the same time we start to see the Lancaster bomber come online. Finally, a bomber that can actually bend metal and break things. The Lancaster, I argue, is the best bomber of World War II. Meanwhile, what we see is that the Americans slowly begin to roll into Theater in 1942. But it's not going to be until 43 that the U.S. army Air Forces in Europe, I'll just call them 8th Air Force, has sufficient number of bombers to launch raids. But what we find is that the Americans have one strategy, daytime altitude precision bombing, and the British have the nighttime strategy of bombing cities. And so what we find in the Casablanca directive of January 43, a decision to agree to disagree. The primary objective will be both the destruction of the German military, industrial and economic system and the decrease of morale. Now I want to point out on the bottom of this directive you can look at the priority of targets and if you'll notice, two new targets have gone to the top. The first is attacking submarine manufacturing. This is recognition in January of 1943, that the battle of Atlantic has not been won. And we need to make sure that we win that. So we actually have England, the island there, to be able to launch an offensive. And the second priority is on aircraft production. And this is recognition that the battle for air superiority is going to be far heavier and far harder than the air power theorists in a war period thought it would be. Now, I'm going to give you a moment to digest this map. I take this map from the German's official history of World War II. What this does is this is strictly for Bomber Command. In 1943 and 44, you can think of the Combined Bomber Offensive as three phases or three battles, commonly known as the Battle of the Ruhr, which takes place from March to July of 43. The key up here is that the round indicates the Battle of the Ruhr. The bigger the circle, the more number of missions against targets. I have this cutout of the Essen or the Ruhr region. And you see in the Battle of the Ruhr in that spring, most of the attacks are taking place in Germany's industrial heartland. What we see then is In July of 43, the Battle of Hamburg. That's the squares you see. The Bomber Command is pushing ever further inland. And a big turning point in the combined bomber offensive is the tactical success that Bomber Command has with the bombing of Berlin in July of 1943. Kills tens of thousands, leaves hundreds of thousands homeless. The bombing of Hamburg effectively takes the second largest city in Germany out of the war. The impact of the firestorm that takes place is not lost on either side. Albert Speer tells Hitler, if we have six more Hamburgs, we'll be out of the war. Likewise, bomber Harris understands the significance of taking out these large industrial cities. And he becomes determined to do in Berlin what he did in Hamburg. And so we see the third battle, the Battle of Berlin, taking place from November to March of 44. You can see the giant triangle there. Now, if you talk about the effectiveness, at least in terms of economic terms, Adam Tooze, in his book Wages of Destruction, argues that the Germans don't really begin to mobilize in terms of their production. We see in January of 1942 significant increase of armament production up until April and May of 1943. And then there's a level off of production. Tooze argues it's the Battle of the Ruhr and the Battle of Hamburg that caps the economic potential of the German wartime production. He also argues that it's an overextension they go into. Berlin is a bridge too Far, because Berlin is not Hamburg. Berlin is wide, has wide stretches, it's difficult to find with air to ground radar. The Germans take lessons from Hamburg to prevent another firestorm. And although what we do find is that there is significant damage to Berlin During World War II, Bomber Command cannot produce the same effect that it was able to do against Hamburg. Instead, Bomber Command overextends. And we see this battle as a battle of attrition and increasing escalation in terms of losses during 43 to 44, Bomber Command begins 43 with over 700 bombers. They're losing significant number of bombers as the year progresses, however the attrition rate they can absorb. But in the winter of 43, 44, what we see is that the German Luftwaffe is able to perfect their night intercept capability. And because of the long ranges that the Lancasters have to fly all the way to Berlin and back, it gives the Luftwaffe an opportunity to intercept them. And so what we see at the end of March of 1944, we see the defeat of Bomber Command. 30th and 31st of March. They suffer 20% losses. Bomber Harris is so lucky that Eisenhower orders him in April to begin bombing western Germany and France in terms of the lead up to the Normandy invasion, because Bomber Command had effectively lost this stage of the war. Now meanwhile, if we turn back to the daytime bombing, we find a different problem for 8th Air Force. First, remember, they're performing high altitude daylight precision bombing. Anyone who's lived in Germany or flown in Germany, know that you can't see the ground. But for short periods of time during the year, relatively short from the middle of the summer until early autumn is a window of opportunity in order to conduct these type of raids. Now 8th Air Force loses its opportunity in 1942 because of delays in production of bombers and a diversion of aircraft to North Africa and then to the Pacific. What happens in the summer of 1943 is it's the point blank directive of June of 43 has 8th Air Force focused on bombing aircraft production facilities, ball bearings, that type of thing. The second aspect we see here is, or actually related to that, In November of 43, Hap Arnold actually orders 8th Air Force begin bombing through clouds. And so 70% of the bombs that 8th Air Force drops during the war are effectively area bombing. It's not even as effective or as efficient as what Bomber Command can do at night with their pathfinders. The second aspect of 43 is the great air battles that take place to determine whether or not self defending bombers can make it to the Target and back. And what is discovered is that the attrition levels are simply too high. This is a chart taken from the US Strategic Bombing Survey. It's over 100 volumes. It's in the library. I recommend. If you haven't taken a look at it, it's fascinating. Just go. They have individual volumes on individual raids. It's a fascinating series. What we see here is that these are crew losses to 8th Air Force in 43 from January to December. The dark bar is the number of crews available. We see that all during that period, the number of crews increase. The white chart is what you don't want to be on. That's the crew losses increase in the summer. The key, and then the black line is the ratio. The key is what happens in October of 1943, this spike. And if we go to individual. These are the famous raids is what I've pulled up. You got the Regensburg schweinfurt raid, a 16% attrition rate. The 6th of September, the Stuttgart raid. But it's really the second Schweinfurt raid, 20% attrition, the same level as Bomber Command would suffer. That following March really breaks the will of 8th Air Force leadership. No longer are they willing to send bombers into Germany unescorted. And so what you see is loss rates drop. And that's primarily because they don't have any bombers left. And they're not going to send them into Germany until the spring of 44. And what takes place is a new technology. This new technology increases significantly the range of fighter aircraft. And so that you'll actually have long range escorts available to go with the bombers. This chart here shows range rings for the US fighters. The best US fighter early in the war is the P47. You can see here the range ring in July of 43 just barely gets across the coast. By August of 43 they've almost made it to Hamburg. The key is In February of 44, not only the P47 can make it well into Germany, but we see the arrival of the P51. Now the P51 ends up being the best air superiority fighter of the war. But before we Americans pat ourselves too much on the back, we should recognize that this aircraft is a dog until a British Merlin engine is put in on it into it. Once that occurs, then this joint aircraft venture becomes the best fighter that we have. And quickly thereafter the range can. By April of 44, the P51 can range all across Germany. What happens at this point is we see the defeat of the Luftwaffe. This Chart here shows German fighter losses from January to June of 1944. Big week. In late February, the sky is clear. 8th Air Force launches and we see loss rates jump to over 50% per month for the squadrons. Imagine that your squadron, you lose half the squadron every month. Now, to me, the question is, why is it that the Luftwaffe would continue to accept such high levels of attrition all the way up to Normandy? I think this gives us some insight into the question I always have with Mahan. If you're the stronger force, how is it that you bring the weaker force to battle? And the answer here is 8th Air Force, the bombers. By the spring of 1944, 8th Air Force has the ability to area bomb to significantly threaten German's industrial production. The Luftwaffe is forced to fly and fight and die for the Fatherland because Hitler, the Nazi regime, values its industry more than it values the Luftwaffe. And so what we see is the hollowing out of the Luftwaffe, such that by Normandy, the Luftwaffe has pulled back its fighter defenses deep within Germany and they're not available to confront the Allied forces on the invasion of Normandy. And so I would argue for Operation Overlord. The most significant contribution that air power does is not seen on the ground. And this is a key point. First off, all the challenges that the U.S. navy and the U.S. army has with Overlord. One challenge they don't have is the threat of enemy aircraft, enemy air attack. Now, what enemy or what aircraft can do against surface forces is limited. But they're most effective when enemy forces concentrate and maneuver like here, but the Luftwaffe is not there. The second effect that air power has is the impact that it has from its interdiction campaign. Now, General Rundstedt, who's responsible for the defense of France, has decided upon a traditional defense. He's going to have frontline forces along the coast, but he's kept in reserve two Panther divisions. And these Panther divisions he's going to bring forward and use those to support the defenses on wherever the Allies land. Now, General Rommel, who's his deputy, he says this won't work. Look, I came from North Africa. I faced the Allies when I didn't have, when they had air superiority. And I know that you can't maneuver, concentrate and maneuver in the rear when your opponent has air superior order over you. He actually, during Overlord, he travels to Germany to try to convince Hitler to change the defense. He wants to bring the forces up along the coast. Fortunately for the Allies, Rommel loses this battle. And so what you also. The US army doesn't see are those Panther divisions that would be brought up in support. My argument here is not that air power wins Operation Overlord, but that air power significantly contributes to to the joint fight that takes place. And sometimes those contributions you can't always see on the battlefield. Now, In September of 1944, Eisenhower releases Bomber Command and 8th Air Force to do their own target priority. Bomber Harris goes back to bombing German cities. And 8th Air Force picks up on two targets. The first target is the transportation system on Germany. And I'll show you here in a second how effective that campaign is. The second target is an actual high altitude, daylight precision bombing against German oil production. Now, I apologize up front. I took this from one of the USBUS reports and I have to explain it to you a little bit. What this shows is this is a proxy for German transportation. This net ton kilometers move means you take one ton, put it in a rail car, move it a kilometer, that's one. So we're measuring these in millions. So was that 15 billion there? So this kind of gives us a proxy on the mobilization of the German economy. It shows the capping of production in 1943, like I showed in the other chart. And what it shows is in late 1944, when Allied Air power is released on the German transportation system, you see transportation drop right off a cliff. And you see this effectively showing the collapse of the German economy, which by early 1945 is no longer functioning. So operationally, the transportation campaign is effective in collapsing the German economy once it's released from September to January or February of 1945. Likewise, and this is an even worse graph, but also taken from the US bus, this has German synthetic oil production. So by 1944, the German army and air force in Germany are reliant upon locally produced synthetic fuel. They're no longer getting their fuel from outside of Germany. And so this is particularly important in the defense that the Germans are able to make. And what we see is that when that campaign really commences in the summer of 1944, the black is production, the red is consumption. We see that significantly fall off in later 1944. This is one of the reasons, one of the primary reasons, that the German army doesn't have much fuel in order to launch offenses. Also, this chart can give us some insight on what high altitude, daylight precision bombing can do. These targets are relatively small. You can't take them out with area bombing. So it actually takes precise, precise strikes. But what happens in October? The clouds come back in. 8th Air Force is not able to have strikes on Those synthetic fuel production. And you can see that the Germans are able to double their fuel consumption in the Latter Half of 1944, enough for the Germans to launch their counteroffensive, which we call the Battle of the Bulge, but not enough to sustain it. Okay, so what's my argument here? Here at the end, I will argue that ultimately, operationally, Bomber Command is successful. They're able to destroy the targets, the cities on their list, and 8th Air Force is successful in 1944 and 45 in causing, along with there are some other factors, the collapse of the German economy. And yet by February of 1945, we don't see, like the air power theorist theory of victory that Nazi Germany ends up surrendering. In other words, air power does not independently win this war. Now why might that be? Well, I've hinted on a couple of reasons. Right. And Professor Trapani talked before the break. He talked about the nature of the Nazi regime and the ability of Hitler to control his population. I would also argue that some of this has to do with the Allied side and Roosevelt's demands for unconditional surrender. Who's going to be coerced into conceding to unconditional surrender when your survival's at stake? It's very difficult to do that with air power. Now, I will. I do suggest that as we look at future wars, limited wars, later in the course, ask this question, question. When the demands are not unlimited, can punishment or denial strategies actually work to gain limited aims? The other aspect has to do with moral or ethical implications. First, the moral implication of political leaders asking for unconditional surrender. Don't they know it's going to lead to these type of battles and these type of costs, is that something a military leader should be able to push back on or not? Second, in terms of the implications, when your theory of victory is no longer targeting the military, but the center of gravity shifts to either the enemy's population or its economy, I would argue that's still a valid conversation to make. Now I hear about economic sanctions that are being put in place. Who are those targeted at? We can think in terms of nuclear strategy, counter value, what does that really entail? These type of questions are still relevant today. And finally, what I started off with is this idea of as new technologies come on board, how do we integrate them into existing military capability? Should we think of these as better a complement to existing capabilities? I know, I was in the Air Force in the late 90s and this was the big debate going on with space. In terms, did space just help us do ground battle better or should we think of space independently? And we're having that same type of argument in terms of cyber. These are still very relevant questions for today. And with that, I'll take whatever questions that you may have. Normally, I get a ton of questions on the moral efficacy of strategic bombing. Oh, I thought someone was lifting a hand there. All right, I'll ask the question I normally get. How is it that morally that you could use air power to target an enemy civilian population? And when I'm asked this question, and this question actually came up in the Future War Fighting Symposium, and I stood up and I said, we'll address this later. So this is my opportunity to address this later. I think it's very interesting when you think back to Thucydides and you think about the moral collapse of Athens. It takes place over time. I used to teach with Williamson Murray. You read his book on World War II, that real big one there. And he talks about how societies over time, as wars continues, how societies are willing more and more to put the efficiency of gaining victory in war or revenge in war above the moral aspects. And you see that in this war clearly. Okay, we'll take a break. Welcome back again, and thanks for your attention.